everything thank you very much yeah hi welcome everybody i hope you
had a good lunch break um welcome back to our afternoon session
uh hi i'm sandra i will speak about digital ser
enity and how that goes advocating for it in europe and
i'm very thankful for new public because i'm one of
some speakers that i could make it to atmosphere conf due to
the sponsorship by new public so thanks very much for having me
i feel honored oh sorry no there it is um okay okay
okay sorry i should use this one yeah so within
the next 30 minutes i will speak a little about what's
going on with digital serenity and what the concepts in
europe are discussed about this and the goal really is to exchange
knowledge knowledge on framings what people use in canada in
europe but also on a more global perspective because i think it
's very important to exchange knowledge and get to know each other
and everything and i also think that we need to speak more
about our political demands it's good and relevant to build things
and to use existing infrastructure but i think it's also very
important to to be more present about what we demand actually and
if we have a little bit time left i would like to
speak a little bit about cross protocol corporation yeah so that's
me i'm sandra i live in vienna and ber
lin my professional background is within political science but i also worked
in communication and the policy field on several projects and as you
can see by my different handles i'm not only active within
at proto but also i'm coming from the activity pub field
so the penguin is my handle within mastodon and activity
pub and that being said besides my professional background i'm engaged
since more than 10 years within the digital rights environment so i
advocate for freedom of information in austria by now we finally
after more than 15 years have a freedom of information act and
it's always about openness and and digital user rights so this
is my perspective but i'm also active with chaos communication congress
i don't know who have you heard of of this yeah
okay so and they're putting up some ethical principles they commit
themselves to and i feel very connected to those it's not
only about making public data available but also protecting private data and
stating that information should be free um but there's also one
the third one uh which brings us to our topic which is
promote decentralization right so how did i come here uh we
had in europe uh exactly one year ago we had something called
ahoy which was uh our european social web day together
with the indie sky and that's where i met uh bor
is and ted and also sebastian um from eurosky which
we had the launch in november which was a very valuable
day and you can re-watch all the videos uh on that
presentations as well and then by now i'm lucky we're
here and i hope there will be many more atmosphere conference and
maybe soon one in europe i think that would be something to
look for so let's get into it so um i
think i don't have to speak that much about it while
we're here um but just to maybe bring some attention um
digital sovereignty is since the last year a topic not only for
europe but also in canada right so and at eurosky
i met jen from ganda who spoke also about their
their uh discussions about digital sovereignty and we also had like uh
several incidents i would call them with regard to international organizations but
also threatening uh governments and their societies with um different outcomes let
's say that way um so if we speak about digital sovereignty
um the main idea is to develop an own technical stack so
you overcome relying on providers that are subject to foreign jurisdiction um
the other biggest the other second idea is that you need to
support european corporations in order to get to reach digital sovereignty
but i would like to highlight that with this approach i think
the danger of sovereignty washing just as we have open washing uh
is is growing uh therefore um so digital sovereignty
and the agenda around this is also intertwined with the offers
to build alternatives to centralize big tech social networks right and
we need to have a space for our public discourse we need
to be able to exchange freely and have a pluralistic information
ecosystem and oh sorry i would argue and i will argue that
we need to do this through building and using existing public social
networks that are based on open protocols and what we see right
now within different developments uh for european social networks there
are very different approaches let's say that way um so we
have european locked in social networks that was just the start
of medium a german one um but also as you probably know
we have other open protocol based ones uh that but connect themselves
to age verification and id scans like we social um and then
to put even more one aspect of an ideal and not very
valuable one in my eyes for state-run digital infrastructure and uh
social networks so the french president emmanuel macron uh
gave a speech uh last autumn where he analyzed the situation right
i think um but when it comes to saying that uh anonymous
accounts are the problem i think that is not that right because
uh hate is spread as well with full names in the internet
field so uh that's why i'm very much pro right
for anonymity and we have that right and we should still
fight hard for that right also against our authorities against our national
governments um yeah and just a little bit short i have to
speed up a little um this this concept of state-run digital
infrastructure in the academic field it's called uh digital public infrastructure
dpi and in the european context uh it's mainly
thought about european digital wallet id systems payment systems but the
focus is a state run it's state control so it's
state control over their citizens and i think or i hope what
we all here are more in favor of is a public digital
infrastructure so tech digital infrastructure for the public and also run by
the public but public funded as well without state control so this
is the concept of public digital infrastructure um there there's already
some conceptual work around it um i i put the references here
so i hope if you're interested you can check that out
even more so um yeah so um the first uh association i
think one has of speaking about digital sovereignty and europe is of
course you do it by legislation right you probably heard about the
general data protection regulations gdpr and the more younger ones
the digital service uh uh act and the digital markets act and
the dma is more there to make sure that our digital
markets function well so the european union established themselves the goal
to have functional markets right um and they acknowledge that this is
not that there yet so the dma was uh put up
for that uh to fight against oligopols and to
to to to make sure that european users have uh choices
and then the dsa is more consumer rights uh function so
it would there are the rights included that how you can delete
stuff or your general rights against uh um digital corporations and i
would say uh that was and is a success story really you
have on both ends you have people arguing the enforcement of the
dsa is still too weak uh and on the other hand
you have i will come back to that um voices uh that
say we need to deregulate even more and we need
to have the so-called digital omnibus that that uh
want to get rid of a lot of user and so on
the other hand we need to see the rights on the premise
of our economic standards in europe have we could become more powerful
so to speak um just shortly we have also european threats
against our own legislation i would call them we have the case
of a former head lobbyist of meta who is now a
member of our european parliament and by the eep was
uh nominated as the appointed rapporteur on exactus digital
omnibus so i think what's it's clear what
the problem is and also within uh european jurisdiction um a
lot of digital companies put their head offices inireland because
they have the lowest taxes there but also um the the the
the enforcement of the regulation is somewhat unsatisfactory max sch
rams and his none of your business association is trying to
enforce more and more of the dsa also against irish
pressures and a different aspect is also that it's very une
qual forces so this is a study by corporate europe observatory
and lobby control and it's stating that just in 2025 just
for brussels so it's not about berlin lobby
ists or lobbyists situated in berlin or in paris
it's just for brussels it's 150 million euros
uh just this year so you can see um it's of
high relevance what digital policies are about the digital policies we we
have in europe um yeah so a little bit deeper uh on
on our what's going on in europe um last may we
had an election uh on our european parliament and what's
relevant there is that we had a change of majorities and
by now we have a conservative right majority uh within the europe
an parliament um and also what is very important for this year
is that we have the negotiations on the so-called multi-ann
ual financial framework more or less the budget of the european
union and um this is also an indicator right right now it
's very important to put up our political demands because what's
not now in the budget won't be there for the next
six years so we have like this year is really really important
and that's why i make all the effort to spread the
message because we need to be loud because money wise we don
't even get there anyway all we have is the power of
us and i would like to spread some ideas of what political
demands could be so we all can repeat them and spread them
so um yeah i hope i hope you join me in this
effort um and as i said we need to fight this dere
gulation and simplification approach and what's uh what's
a hopeful aspect of it the dma probably will be expanded
uh for social networks as well and and the debate uh for
for expanding interoperability is also strong but needs more commitment
i think but those are two positive things and this picture here
shows uh our panel discussion which we had at foster a very
big developer conference in brussels and alexandra ge
ese is member of the european parliament and she's very
active in in in uh pointing out our approaches as well that
open protocol based social networks are relevant for democracy and they need
funding as well um so i i want to give a shout
out to her and her whole team um so the as i
as i told you before the main tool for how european
union thinks they will achieve digital sovereignty is by the idea of
implementing euro stacks there are different approaches on this but more or
less it's the idea of we need to buy european
and then we will reach digital sovereignty so um more or less
and that's my critical stand point of the it says um
we just need the same infrastructure just make it european and
then and then our problems are solved and i think that's
obviously not the case so i come up with three uh critique
points that would broaden the concept of digital serenity right
now it's very narrow and i think it makes a lot
of sense to broaden it up because then digital serenity
will help us solve anyway their uh societal problems on a long-
term basis yeah so what are my critique points so the first
critique point uh is that making it european is not enough
right it needs to be open and public benefit as well those
those are um yeah indicators that will help achieve real digital sovereignty
real digital autonomy also for the users against their their authorities so
to speak and also it helps bringing people together being working collaborative
on ideas it's uh it's in many um ways beneficial
i would argue and just to give a little bit spotlight on
european initiatives the open firm europe uh took up on the
idea of a european sovereign tech fund um which is a
very very very valuable concept in my eyes that's why i
want to highlight the work nick gates is the one um working
on this um the second critique point is that buying european
of course will be done with public money right and um so
if the idea is that you uh that you uh spent a
high amount of public money buying european private uh products uh
i would argue from from a user rights based approach that of
course some amount of this public money then needs to be spent
in order to buy and establish public digital infrastructure um it's
so obvious for me it's it's it's always very
hard for me to state that because in my eyes um yeah
and uh if you don't know it by now the free
software foundation europe uh long has this long uh campaign for public
money public code uh which we refer to uh which we refer
to as well and uh matthias kirchner is
the president of of this organization and as this topic is debated
within the german parliament quite well um we found out that uh
just on the federal level from the german state they spent around
750 canadian dollars per year just for microsoft licenses um
yeah okay um so public procurement is
like a very relevant uh level uh leveller um and another
uh very recommended organization the public future uh the open future institute
uh by uh and aditya and susana rosso
just published this uh some days ago but i recommend reading all
of their policy briefs it's very valuable knowledge um they
pointed out like how that we need to focus more on public
procurement uh and exactly that's also what happening uh more and
more governments or or state entities decide to procure open source based
uh uh software but and and just to name some so the
austrian minute one austrian ministry started to using nextcloud
within the hybrid version the austrian army uses open desk open
desk as a a tool that was as written there as well
uh developed by um uh the german uh senders um the
german army uses matrix and so the list goes on but still
we have uh other approaches like the state of bavaria
uh buying microsoft products again for one how you say that
billion euros one yeah a lot of money without like a legal
legal legal right to do so actually so um and this is
especially relevant like we already have uh several building blocks of public
digital infrastructure right they're all open open open open source based
and they are there and they could be uh by it so
to say if not at least funded um and that's what
we should do i think and of course interoperable social
networks are a relevant part of of such and stack um my
third critique point would be uh exactly that that if we want
to achieve real digital serenity social networks need to be
understood as a relevant part of that and social so like we
can't achieve digital serenity without social serenity
and hannah aubry who is the community director of
macedon uh published a blog post on that um if
you want to read further so all of this critique um i
i addressed also to politicians themselves um in autumn there was the
summit on european digital sovereignty and when it was um announced
and the program was announced it was obvious that the main topics
circle around ai and cloud infrastructure and stuff and and we sat
together and uh tried to find a way to bring our demands
to the table so what we did is i found co-founded
the alliance called open networks and democratic public spheres by now we
are supported with more than 30 other organizations we come up with
four demands that interact which is which is other um yeah and
again to establish long-term solutions um that that's the goal
um yeah and only i i will present only one demand of
those that we had and i think that's a very impactful
one uh ralf stockman who is the head of the
digital affairs within berlin library came up with the so-called
plus one principle and this plus one principle is addressed at public
institutions because again they are funded with public money so they should
feel a higher uh how do you say that um they should
feel responsible uh uh to make wise decisions and if they're
doing uh social media communications they should feel obliged to publish their
communications in at least one open protocol uh open protocol based social
network right um and as this was presented at our berlin
fedi day uh it has the fediware logo i
hope you don't mind um but the argument is um yeah
if if they say uh we need to stay on those big
tech platforms we can't leave because there are the people whoever
that then still is um that makes a bridge to say okay
if you think you have to stay there at least do one
other uh social network um yeah and i want to uh highlight
also to lauren's blog about connected places he writes about
uh both protocols and it's very critical which is good um
and he says um law makers should not only speak about digital
sovereignty but they should use uh the networks that are already there
otherwise uh it's just birds right and i think he's
right on that one um it's not only about social networks
i think again the interrelatedness is also uh should be
important for media systems and maybe you have heard of this public
spaces incubator which is an initiative not only for european
public broadcasts but also uh uh non-european
ones and um besides their prototypes um they want to implement uh
both protocols within their uh network services um and i think this
is yeah something to look out for um okay five more minutes
um another initiative i want to highlight is self-social they came
up with uh 10 demands on their own and what what their
latest uh initiative is the so-called digital independence day so the
first sunday every month they call for digital independence day and
the idea is at least on this one sunday you can
uh try to switch over from one big tech services to one
non-big tech and so they come up at d dot day
with several cookbook recipes uh which are differentiated between is
it easy or is it hard how hard is it and they
tell you step by step what you need to think about and
how you can do that and i think that's only not
from from an individual user's perspective but also again for uh
public institutions it's like very helpful to have examples of of
initiatives that have done that so for example the university of in
nsbruck is uh is hosting their own mastodon
uh server right at their own instance uh for all for all
employees and they will extend that to students as well uh and
making uh services as pixel fed for example uh usable for those
um so please check out d-day they i i checked yesterday
and there will be one event on the 5th of apr
il the 5th of april will be the next one
in colorado i think but maybe in canada we soon
have events as well that would be nice right so to sum
up uh what are some demands uh that um i think are
available uh for not even not not all only europe i think
we need to push further that interoperability is expanded and
portability will be established so not only data portability but
of course it's proto portability of identities and feeds right
it's to make real choices available and we need to call
for funding for public digital infrastructure and implement the one plus one
principle at least for public institutions so three more minutes left that
's good um
as you have heard uh my background is with an activity pub
so i'm active there since some years and not only because
of my nature of i want to get to know uh more
people and their ideas and i think that's the strength for
us to get to know each other and learn from us um
i think we have within the the open protocols i think we
have some fields that i think would make perfect uh examples where
we can work together or at least talk to each other despite
differences um i think the field of moderation is uh such a
topic as well as trust and safety and the one i'm
here for policy and advocacy so um if you're working in
that field around policy and advocacy please let us talk later um
and um yeah i just want to make the point that um
we need more cooperation uh and and i hope such events at
atmosphere make that possible um for us yeah one example um i
was invited uh to join jess michael from ift
us and aaron from blue sky to speak about trust and
safety exactly in canadian embassy in berlin um so yeah
hopefully we have uh more more meetings like this and yeah work
together um so i would like to call uh
to work together get to know each other learn from each other
uh in order so we can achieve a better digital future for
all of us no matter if we're in europe or elsewhere
and um yeah i i hope we can get to know each
other better repeat our method messages together build together in general um
and yeah please let's do that so if you want to
stay in contact or reach out those here you can find me
but also i will also i will be here till monday
as well thanks so much